Add  support for table value expressions in ORM (#113)
django/deps: draft/table_value_expression.rst

referenced by the rest of the queryset.

The first motivating cases are set-returning functions, multi-column
table-valued functions, and querysets or subqueries used as table sources.

The proposal is intentionally focused on the problem and desired ORM behavior.
The exact internal API is still open.

Motivation
==========
In this section we try to expose the problem we currently have
For example, a scalar subquery can be used as an annotation:

.. code-block:: python

   first_subject = Cohort.objects.order_by("id").values("subject")[:1]

   Sales.objects.annotate(
       first_subject=Subquery(first_subject)
   ).values("first_subject")

The reasons this works:

* ``.values("first_subject")`` is treated like a selected column of
  the ``Sales`` query.
* This happens because Django renders the annotation in the ``SELECT`` clause.
  That is valid for scalar expressions.

But this breaks when we are dealing with multi-column results. For example:

.. code-block:: python
   first_object = Cohort.objects.order_by("id").values("subject", "duration")[:1]

   Sales.objects.annotate(
       first_subject=Subquery(first_object)
   ).values("first_subject")

> This will raise `Cannot resolve expression type, unknown output_field`. because the ORM does not have an expression representing multiple columns.

Reviewer: Maybe add

```suggestion
This will raise `Cannot resolve expression type, unknown output_field`. because the ORM does not have an expression representing multiple columns and thus cannot make use of a join against the multi-column subquery.
```

Set-Returning Functions in ``SELECT``
-------------------------------------

PostgreSQL's ``generate_series()`` is a set-returning function. Today, if it is
used as an annotation, Django renders it in the ``SELECT`` list:

.. code-block:: python

   Sales.objects.annotate(
       series=GenerateSeries(1, 3)
   ).values("series")

Conceptual SQL shape today:

.. code-block:: sql

   SELECT generate_series(1, 3) AS "series"
   FROM "sales"

The ORM does not expose a way to place it in the `FROM` clause.

Filtering Set-Returning Annotations
-----------------------------------

Filtering a set-returning annotation also treats the function as a scalar
expression:

.. code-block:: python

   Sales.objects.annotate(
       series=GenerateSeries(1, 3)
   ).filter(series__gt=1)

Conceptual SQL shape today:

.. code-block:: sql

   SELECT ..., generate_series(1, 3) AS "series"
   FROM "sales"
   WHERE generate_series(1, 3) > 1

The function is still not a table source. It is duplicated as an expression in

> the ``SELECT`` and ``WHERE`` clauses.

Reviewer: Should we explain why this is an issue with an inlined table of results and compare what the output would be if `series` was part of the `FROM` clause?

Author: I have refined it in latest commits.

Multi-Column Subqueries
-----------------------

Subqueries have a similar limitation. A scalar subquery works when it returns
one column:

.. code-block:: python

   Sales.objects.annotate(
       first_subject=Subquery(
           Cohort.objects.order_by("id").values("subject")[:1]
       )
   )

But a queryset returning multiple columns cannot be represented as a scalar
``Subquery``:

.. code-block:: python

   Cohort.objects.values("subject", "duration")

As a scalar expression, this has no single ``output_field``. As a table
expression, it could expose named columns:

.. code-block:: python

   Sales.objects.alias(
       cohort_data=TableExpression(
           Cohort.objects.values("subject", "duration")

>        )

Reviewer: Not entirely sure we need a `TableExpression` wrapper in this case for same reason `Subquery` wrapping of `QuerySet` instances is unnecessary in most cases.

Author: yes we don't in this case. Thanks.  But the necessity i try to explain in the  section mention in this [comment](https://github.com/django/deps/pull/113/changes#r3537680606)

``CharField``.

For table expressions that expose more than one column, Django needs an
equivalent representation for multiple named fields. For example:

.. code-block:: python

   JsonEach("payload")
   # exposes:
   #   key -> TextField()
   #   value -> JSONField()

This may be implemented as a lightweight composite output field, or as part of
a more general ``CompositeField`` design. The initial scope should be limited to
describing expression/query output, not full model-field behavior.

This matters because the ORM must preserve Django's existing lookup behavior.
If ``item__key`` resolves to a ``TextField``, then normal text lookups and
transforms should continue to work.

The exact public API is still open.

Expression-like table sources
-----------------------------

After output columns can be represented, the ORM needs a way to register an
expression or query as a table source in the ``FROM`` or ``JOIN``.

We will take inspiration from the existing `FilteredRelation`. We would follow the
mechanism it used to register itself as a table source in the ``FROM`` clause.

This DEP uses ``TableExpression`` as a placeholder name. The final public API

> may use a different name.

Reviewer: I suspect we won't need `TableExpression` at all as we'll be able to perform the `FROM` aliasing based on other heuristics.

For example, in the case of `QuerySet.resolve_expression` if there are more than one field than it's `output_field` would be a `CompositeField` instance and we could make `GenerateSeries.output_field = CompositeField(IntegerField())` even if it's a singleton.

The heuristic to add a member to `sql.Query.alias_map` could then be `isinstance(output_field, CompositeField)`.

Author: We were also was in the favor of not adding `TableExpression` or something. But what we have discovered that `.alias_map` requires a `Table-like object`.  and it was failing on the line
 [            j for j in self.alias_map if self.alias_map[j].join_type == INNER](https://github.com/django/django/blob/f1440a752ec034277ccdad914995c3f164308e41/django/db/models/sql/query.py#L748)
 `Query` or `Subquery`  don't have `table_name`, `table_alias`, `join_type`, `parent_alias` which would require to live inside `alias_map` as per the [contract](https://github.com/django/django/blob/f1440a752ec034277ccdad914995c3f164308e41/django/db/models/sql/datastructures.py#L34-L43).
 
we might don't need `objects.alias(TableExpression(Subquery(...))` instead 

```
if isinstance(expr.output_field, CompositeField):
alias_map[alias] =TableExpression(expr)
```
also query object `as_sql` will generate something `(SELECT ... FROM ...)`  i'm assuming we might need something in prefix or suffix in the FROM clause with another table. for that also we need some handling.

Reviewer: I'm not sure I understand why the need for objects in `alias_map` to have certain attributes requires that objects passed to `QuerySet.alias` be `TableExpression`.

Why can't `alias` do something like

```python
if isinstance(expr.output_field, CompositeField):
   join = Join(
       expr,
       alias,
       ...
   )
   self.join(join)
```

In other words, shouldn't we adapt `Join` and `BaseTable` to be more _expression like_ and allow composition of other `Expression` over introducing `TableExpression` to bridge between them?

Reviewer 2: I overlooked that this version of the DEP still suggested that `TableExpression` was going to be exposed to users. As you mentioned in https://github.com/django/deps/pull/113#discussion_r3409860413 with the analogy to `Subquery`, it should be unnecessary in most instances, perhaps only if you need to specify a special kind of join?

We were just following the implementation hint in https://code.djangoproject.com/ticket/37115#comment:8 to create a base class for `BaseTable` and `Join`.

> requires that objects passed to QuerySet.alias be TableExpression.

I think @p-r-a-v-i-n is aware that we don't want users to have to supply these wrappers, see https://github.com/django/deps/pull/113#discussion_r3411094546, but we definitely need to update the DEP, because it suggests Simon's reading.

> In other words, shouldn't we adapt Join and BaseTable to be more expression like and allow composition of other Expression over introducing TableExpression to bridge between them?

I think this is where we're all heading, let's discuss once there's an implementation PR to look at, which I think is imminent.

Reviewer: > it should be unnecessary in most instances, perhaps only if you need to specify a special kind of join?

right but I wonder if this should be a concern of this work or not, I think that laying down the foundation for table-like expressions is already a ton of work in itself.

> I think this is where we're all heading, let's discuss once there's an implementation PR to look at, which I think is imminent.

Sounds good! Peeking at code will definitely help here.

Reviewer 2: The question about join type came up right away in the first cut of the implementation, any guidance here @charettes and @LilyFirefly would be very helpful!

https://github.com/django/django/pull/21496#discussion_r3455381877

Example:

.. code-block:: python

   Sales.objects.alias(
       series=TableExpression(GenerateSeries(1, 3))
   ).filter(series__value__gt=1)

For single-column table expressions, the final API may allow a shorter form such

> as ``series__gt=1``. That detail is still open.

Reviewer: That should be relatively straightforward to support by having `CompositeField.get_lookup` use it's only field when it's the case.

associating each exposed column with a Django field.

The exact mechanism is open. One possible direction is to represent this through
``Expression.output_field`` using the lightweight composite output metadata
described above.

Table Source Compilation
------------------------

The ORM must also know where and how a table expression should be compiled.

Examples include:

* inline in the ``FROM`` clause,
* as a ``LATERAL JOIN``,
* or, in future work, as a ``WITH``/CTE binding.

This means output metadata alone is not enough. The ORM also needs table-source
compilation behavior.

Query Integration
-----------------

Table expression aliases should be usable in common queryset operations:

.. code-block:: python

   .values("item__key")
   .filter(item__key="name")
   .order_by("item__key")
   .annotate(key_copy=F("item__key"))

The exact resolver integration point is open. Candidate locations include
``Query.resolve_ref()``, ``Query.setup_joins()``, ``Query.names_to_path()``, or
a smaller helper shared by multiple query paths.

Rationale
=========

Why ``FilteredRelation`` is relevant
------------------------------------

> It's the only way users have today to insert content into the ``JOIN`` clause (by appending a ``WHERE`` clause).

Author: Should the position of this get change ?

Reviewer: I think it's worth pointing out, not sure where the best location is

```suggestion
Why ``FilteredRelation`` is relevant
------------------------------------
It's the only way users have today to insert content into the ``JOIN`` clause (by appending a condition to the ``ON`` clause).
```

This works naturally for scalar expressions.

Table expressions need something similar, but they may expose multiple columns.
Using an ``output_field``-based design may allow table-like expressions to fit
the existing ``Expression`` interface more naturally.

Why ``alias()`` Is a Candidate API
----------------------------------

``QuerySet.alias()`` already lets users give temporary names to expressions
inside a query.

Table expression aliases are similar from the user's point of view:

.. code-block:: python

   Sales.objects.alias(
       item=TableExpression(JsonEach("payload"))
   )

Internally, however, table expression aliases are different from scalar
annotation aliases. They must be registered as table sources, not only as
reusable scalar expressions.

Alternatives Considered
=======================

Explicit Column Metadata
------------------------

An early implementation could accept column metadata directly:

.. code-block:: python

   TableExpression(
       JsonEach("payload"),
       columns={
           "key": models.TextField(),
           "value": models.JSONField(),
       },
   )

This may be easy to prototype, but it creates a separate metadata path from

> ``Expression.output_field``.

Reviewer: Not convinced this is warranted or not something that could not be provided by `JSONEach` directly.

e.g.

```python
JsonEach("payload", key_column="attr")
```

could be turned into

```sql
(SELECT key AS "attr", value FROM json_each("payload"))
```

:Shepherd: Jacob Walls
:Status: Draft
:Type: Feature
:Created: 2026-05-30

.. contents:: Table of Contents
   :depth: 3
   :local:

Abstract
========

This DEP proposes adding ORM support for table expressions: query sources that
can appear in SQL ``FROM`` or ``JOIN`` clauses and expose columns that can be
referenced by the rest of the queryset.

The first motivating cases are set-returning functions, multi-column
table-valued functions, and querysets or subqueries used as table sources.

The proposal is intentionally focused on the problem and desired ORM behavior.
The exact internal API is still open.

Motivation
==========
In this section we try to expose the problem we currently have
For example, a scalar subquery can be used as an annotation:

.. code-block:: python

   first_subject = Cohort.objects.order_by("id").values("subject")[:1]

   Sales.objects.annotate(
       first_subject=Subquery(first_subject)
   ).values("first_subject")

The reasons this works:

* ``.values("first_subject")`` is treated like a selected column of
  the ``Sales`` query.
* This happens because Django renders the annotation in the ``SELECT`` clause.
  That is valid for scalar expressions.

> But this breaks when we are dealing with multi-columns results. for example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But this breaks when we are dealing with multi-column results. For example:
```

.. code-block:: python
   first_object = Cohort.objects.order_by("id").values("subject", "duration")[:1]

   Sales.objects.annotate(
       first_subject=Subquery(first_object)
   ).values("first_subject")

> This will raise `Cannot resolve expression type, unknown output_field`. bcs ORM don't know how to handle the multi-columns.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This will raise `Cannot resolve expression type, unknown output_field`, because the ORM does not have an expression representing multiple columns.
```

Set-Returning Functions in ``SELECT``
-------------------------------------

PostgreSQL's ``generate_series()`` is a set-returning function. Today, if it is
used as an annotation, Django renders it in the ``SELECT`` list:

.. code-block:: python

   Sales.objects.annotate(
       series=GenerateSeries(1, 3)
   ).values("series")

Conceptual SQL shape today:

.. code-block:: sql

   SELECT generate_series(1, 3) AS "series"
   FROM "sales"

> it's not clear how to get it into the `FROM` clause. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ORM does not expose a way to place it in the `FROM` clause. 
```

       cohort_data=TableExpression(
           Cohort.objects.values("subject", "duration")
       )
   ).values("cohort_data__subject", "cohort_data__duration")

There are three aspects to this that we'd like to work on:
- A table expression can be registered as a source in ``FROM`` or ``JOIN``.
- A table expression has a stable alias.
- Columns exposed by that alias can be referenced in the rest of the queryset.

Specification
=============

Composite output metadata
-------------------------

The first requirement is a way for an expression or query source to describe
multiple output columns.

For scalar expressions, Django already uses ``Expression.output_field``. For
example, a subquery returning only ``subject`` can expose a single field such as
``CharField``.

For table expressions that expose more than one column, Django needs an
equivalent representation for multiple named fields. For example:

.. code-block:: python

   JsonEach("payload")
   # exposes:
   #   key -> TextField()
   #   value -> JSONField()

This may be implemented as a lightweight composite output field, or as part of
a more general ``CompositeField`` design. The initial scope should be limited to

> describing expression/query output, not full model-field behavior.

Author: We planned that the design of  `CompositeField` would work for  `virtual sources(expressions)` first.

Reviewer: Just to make sure I understand. You mean that we would only support usage for _annotation_ purpose in when building queries and not as a field that can be used when defining a model class?

This matters because the ORM must preserve Django's existing lookup behavior.
If ``item__key`` resolves to a ``TextField``, then normal text lookups and
transforms should continue to work.

The exact public API is still open.

Expression-like table sources
-----------------------------

After output columns can be represented, the ORM needs a way to register an
expression or query as a table source in ``FROM`` or ``JOIN``.

> We will take inspiration from existing `FilteredRelation`. We would follow the

Reviewer 2: from -> from the

You might (?) also briefly mention why `FilteredRelation` is relevant -- it's the only way users have today to insert content into the JOIN clause (by appending a `WHERE` clause). Maybe it's fine.

> mechanism it used to register itself as a table source in ``FROM`` clause.

Reviewer 2: in -> in the

Table Source Compilation
------------------------

The ORM must also know where and how a table expression should be compiled.

Examples include:

* inline in the ``FROM`` clause,
* as a ``LATERAL JOIN``,
* or, in future work, as a ``WITH``/CTE binding.

This means output metadata alone is not enough. The ORM also needs table-source
compilation behavior.

Query Integration
-----------------

Table expression aliases should be usable in common queryset operations:

.. code-block:: python

   .values("item__key")
   .filter(item__key="name")
   .order_by("item__key")
   .annotate(key_copy=F("item__key"))

The exact resolver integration point is open. Candidate locations include
``Query.resolve_ref()``, ``Query.setup_joins()``, ``Query.names_to_path()``, or
a smaller helper shared by multiple query paths.

Rationale
=========

Why Focus on the Problem Before a Specific Class
------------------------------------------------

The first question is the ORM capability Django needs:

* represent table-like query sources,
* know their output columns,
* and resolve references to those columns.

Once that capability is clear, the exact internal object model can be evaluated.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

* ``.values("first_subject")`` is treated like a selected column of
  the ``Sales`` query.
* This happens because Django renders the annotation in the ``SELECT`` clause.
  That is valid for scalar expressions.

But this breaks when we are dealing with multi-column results. For example:

.. code-block:: python
   first_object = Cohort.objects.order_by("id").values("subject", "duration")[:1]

   Sales.objects.annotate(
       first_subject=first_object
   ).values("first_subject")

This will raise `Cannot resolve expression type, unknown output_field`. because the ORM does not have an expression representing multiple columns and thus cannot make use of a join against the multi-column subquery.

Set-Returning Functions in ``SELECT``
-------------------------------------

PostgreSQL's ``generate_series()`` is a set-returning function. Today, if it is
used as a scalar annotation, Django renders it in the ``SELECT`` list:

.. code-block:: python

   Sales.objects.annotate(series=GenerateSeriesFunc(1, 3))

The actual SQL generated:

.. code-block:: sql

   SELECT "SRF_sales"."id", "SRF_sales"."sold_on", "SRF_sales"."day", generate_series(1, 3) AS "series"
   FROM "SRF_sales"

> The ORM does not expose a way to place the set-returning function in the ``FROM`` clause.

Reviewer 3: It would be nice to also include the SQL we want to be able to generate, so readers can compare.

Author: Thanks. I have added it now.

DEP XXXX: Supoort for Table Expressions in the Django ORM
=========================================================

:DEP: XXXX
:Author: Pravin Kamble
:Implementation Team: Pravin Kamble
:Shepherd: Jacob Walls
:Status: Draft
:Type: Feature
:Created: 2026-05-30

.. contents:: Table of Contents
   :depth: 3
   :local:

Abstract
========

This DEP proposes adding ORM support for table expressions: query sources that
can appear in SQL ``FROM`` or ``JOIN`` clauses and expose columns that can be
referenced by the rest of the queryset.

The first motivating cases are set-returning functions, multi-column
table-valued functions, and querysets or subqueries used as table sources.

The proposal is intentionally focused on the problem and desired ORM behavior.
The exact internal API is still open.

Motivation
==========
In this section we try to expose the problem we currently have
For example, a scalar subquery can be used as an annotation:

.. code-block:: python

   first_subject = Cohort.objects.order_by("id").values("subject")[:1]

   Sales.objects.annotate(

>        first_subject=Subquery(first_subject)

Reviewer 2: Let's remove the explicit `Subquery` throughout, as it may be distracting for readers who are used to eliding it.
```suggestion
       first_subject=first_subject
```

   WHERE "series"."value" > 1

Benefits:
* Join and Cardinality Control: Compiling the function in the ``FROM`` clause allows the ORM to choose between ``LEFT JOIN LATERAL`` (preserving the parent rows when the set is empty) and ``CROSS JOIN LATERAL``.
* Valid Filtering: The ``WHERE`` clause filters on the materialized column reference ``"series"."value"`` instead of executing a set-returning function inline. This evaluates correctly and I assume no database execution errors.

Multi-Column Subqueries
-----------------------

Subqueries have a similar limitation. A scalar subquery works when it returns
one column:

.. code-block:: python

   Sales.objects.annotate(
       first_subject=Subquery(
           Cohort.objects.order_by("id").values("subject")[:1]
       )
   )

But a queryset returning multiple columns cannot be represented as a scalar
``Subquery``:

.. code-block:: python

   Cohort.objects.values("subject", "duration")

As a scalar expression, this has no single ``output_field``. As a table
expression, it could expose named columns:

.. code-block:: python

   Sales.objects.alias(
       cohort_data=TableExpression(

>            Cohort.objects.values("subject", "duration")

Reviewer 3: Is the `[:1]` deliberately omitted in the second example? My understanding is that the `[:1]` makes sure there's only one row selected from the subquery, but the examples here are focused on the case of more than one column, so the `[:1]` would be appropriate in both cases.

Author: that's fair. thanks

Expression-like table sources
-----------------------------
After output columns can be represented, the ORM needs a way to explicitly register an expression or query as a table source in the ``FROM`` clause.
We cannot be sure if subqueries return multi-column single row or multi-column multi-row.
For example:

.. code-block:: python

   subquery = Post.objects.filter(user=first_user).values("title", "body")
   User.objects.alias(posts=subquery).values("posts__title", "posts__body")

In this example, the ORM cannot reliably know if the ``subquery`` returns exactly one row or multiple rows.
To solve this, our approach requires the developer to explicitly declare when a result is a multi-row table source.
The user will do this by wrapping the queryset in a ``TableExpression``.

.. code-block:: python

   User.objects.alias(posts=TableExpression(subquery))

This explicit wrapper allows the ORM to cleanly separate the processing logic. When encountering a ``TableExpression``, the ORM knows to place the subquery inside the ``FROM`` clause (utilizing ``LATERAL`` joins if there are outer references) rather than resolving it as a scalar subquery in the ``SELECT`` clause.

> *(Note: This DEP uses ``TableExpression`` as a placeholder name. The final public API may use a different name).*

Author: Please don't mind for writing very late and the reason is i'm being shy to write , I'm afraid of if I sound like "I'm forcing something or being very concrete on something".  

I have try to add clarity in this section why do we might need `TableExpression` wrapper.

 @jacobtylerwalls @LilyFirefly @charettes

Reviewer 3: Wouldn't the ~scalar~ *single row* case look like: (note the `[:1]`)

```python
   subquery = Post.objects.filter(user=first_user).values("title", "body")[:1]
   User.objects.alias(posts=subquery).values("posts__title", "posts__body")
```

Or am I missing something here? (I might be!)

Author: Please correct me, I'm assuming you doubt that i have used similar example with `[:1]` in scaler case.

below is just examples  (my understanding) , so we both are on same page

> subquery = Post.objects.filter(user=first_user).values("title")[:1]

This one is scaler.

> subquery = Post.objects.filter(user=first_user).values("title", "body")[:1]

This is multi-column single row

> subquery = Post.objects.filter(user=first_user).values("title", "body")

If `first_user` has created multiple posts the this  will return  multi-column multi-row

i used this so it represent the `table-value` result

Reviewer 2: Ah, so @LilyFirefly is your idea that we can inspect whether the queryset is sliced, and if not, treat it as multi-row, without the need for a wrapper?

Reviewer 3: I think it's consistent with how we've designed subqueries up to this point and I think it's worth exploring if it will work in practice or cause problems (maybe it's too subtle and people will get confused?).

Reviewer 2: I like it -- let's explore it.

The infrastructure is database-independent, but table-valued functions are
not. Function names, argument syntax, exposed column names, and whether a
column definition clause is required vary by database. Custom ``Func``
expressions remain responsible for vendor-specific SQL through methods such as
``as_postgresql()``, ``as_mysql()``, or ``as_oracle()``.

Query Integration
-----------------

Existing behavior for single-column subqueries does not change. The new logic
is used only when ``filter()``, ``values()``, ``order_by()``, or another
expression references a supported multi-column or set-returning alias.

For example, when the ORM receives:

.. code-block:: python

   .filter(info__email="bob@mail.com")

it splits the name and checks whether ``info`` is present in
``Query.annotations``. If the annotation is a multi-column query, it checks
whether a matching ``SubqueryJoin`` is already present in
``Query.alias_map``. It reuses that join or creates one when needed.

The derived table is then added to the ``FROM`` clause:

.. code-block:: sql

   LEFT OUTER JOIN (
       SELECT email, name
       FROM ...

>    ) info ON (1 = 1)

Reviewer 3: Do we *need* the `ON (1 = 1)`? Might future work want more complex `ON` clauses?

Author: Yes, we need it because the subquery is an independent table source and there is no condition connecting it to the outer table. `ON (1 = 1)` makes every inner row available to every outer row, while` LEFT OUTER JOIN` preserves outer rows when the subquery is empty. In future, if we support a real join condition, we could extend it to accept it .

After that, ``info__email`` resolves to a typed ``Col`` pointing to
``info.email``. If an operation needs the complete alias, it can resolve to an
internal tuple containing all its columns. A multi-column source cannot be
selected as one annotation.

Set-returning function sources follow the same flow, using their
function-specific join representation.

The source is added only when it is needed, and multiple references reuse the
same join. The existing filtering, selection, annotation, and ordering
machinery continues from the resulting ``Col`` or tuple.

Join type follows normal queryset boolean semantics. When a table source is
required by the query, it is compiled as a ``CROSS`` join. If the function returns
no rows, the corresponding base row also produces no result:

.. code-block:: python

   Sales.objects.alias(
       series=GenerateSeries(1, 3),

>    ).filter(series__gt=1)

Reviewer 3: I think this example would benefit from showing which `Sales` objects and `series` values are returned and making it clear which are filtered out. Currently the reader has to guess at how this snippet behaves.
